Causality (tense)
    Relative causality
    Subjunctive
Evidentiality
Agency (intentionality, causatives, &c)
Person
reality

Some of these make sense on nouns and/or adjectives as well as verbs: causality, evidentiality, person (for categorization words).
Just splashing bare verb inflections onto nouns doesn't make a ton of sense on its own though.
Perhaps for each noun/adjective you can add a helping verb, and that's were the verbal inflections get marked; grammaticalize the helper, and you've got a new set of inflections that related to verbs "somehow".

This flexibility of plopping these (often) inflectional bits everywhere feels like it would quickly become a more general pattern.

artifact spirit: I want to be able to express the spirit vs. the brute fact of a thing.
That might be free assignment of "animacy".
Let's say nouns fall into animacy classes, but like names in romance languages, can take different phonetically-realized morphology to mark a noun as being different.
Since nouns and verbs inflect very similarly, the animacy class markings could also be gobbled up by verbs in order to express agency.

Three realis moods: objective, subjective, conjective (established by widespread convention).
These are likely lexical rather than inflectional.

------

what actually are my lexical categories going to be?
how do verbals, nominals, and modifiers relate?


distinguish concepts identifying stuff from concepts identifying the absence of stuff.
What about things that exist whether stuff is present or absent, it is the prenence/absence that is the concept (presence and absence are good examples, actually).

instead of tense, mark causality.
esp. have a tense for independently.
It makes sense to have tenses that relate to other tenses in the text (is that relative tense?).

evidentiality: useful for the clause, useful for a single word, too.
The same might be said about tense, also.

agency, but only in past "tenses"
I.e. I finally sneezed vs. I accidentally snoze


If tenses can attach anywhere, perhaps they shouldn't be obligatory?
If I'm treating tense like topic&focus, that could be quite nice.

Talk vs. speak; hear vs. listen: a telicity of connection.
Fits well with causality, actually.


The reason why there are count particles in Japanese: 20 balls of gomadango vs 5 orders of 4 balls of gomadango each.
So, do I want inflected plurals (there's plenty of inflection opportunity already), or should it be periphrastic?

Person agreement on categorization adjectives (e.g. colors are a common source of categorization disagreement) could make categorization clearer (e.g. that thing which I call blue, but you call violet).

Incorporate instrumentals into verbs.
E.g. walk = to foot move, run = to leg move, fly = to wing move, &c.
