Rationalizations

TODO: investigate the uses of voiceless laterals in natlangs more

TODO: contrastive hierarchy

TODO: I don't seem to have put much thought into my nasals. Why not a palatal?
I know I don't want ŋ, but I'm really debating having ɲ.
Ukrainian does have nʲ, but then I'll also have /nj/, which will likely end up [nʲ] and will merge with ɲ; I'm not sure that actually reason enough to get rid of ɲ, the collision might be a reason to add it and get some extra crunch (irregularity).

TODO: think about tones.
I see that the WALS data shows that languages with implosives tend to have simple tone systems, much more than if the language had ejectives only or no glottalization at all.


I'm making the call that p' isn't a thing.
Essentially, it just adds some symmetry with the lack of f', while at the same time reinforcing a very natural assymmetry; namely that ejectives are hard and the front and implosives are hard at the back.

Most palatal/velar consonants were previously velar/uvular.
Since there were no voiced uvular stops, there are no no velar stops.
However, that phonetic space is nevertheless available.
Therefore, I should expect ɟ~g (TODO and more).

The unvoiced stops are phonetically aspirated, though the feature is not contrastive.
I get the feeling that this is because unaspriated stops became implosive.
This is following the analysis of non-explosive stops as being marked by not having a positive pressure buildup.
See ["Explosives, Implosives, and Nonexplosives: the Linguistic Function of Air Pressure Differences in Stops" by George N. Clements](http://nickclements.free.fr/publications/2002a.pdf).
Presumably, aspirated stops are characterized by a larger pressure buildup than unaspirated, and those features could shift to have the bias ("center of pressure buildup") be more neutral.
I.e. both kinds of stops have lost some pressure, but current implosives are still characterized by having a lower pressure than unvoiced stops.

Basically, I like the uvular trill from French (and some accents of German and Dutch).
Therefore, I let the voiced uvular fricative turn to ʀ before fronting of the dorsal consonants.
Since that trill could be difficult in some circumstances or for some speakers, I'll let ʀ~ʁ.
I'm not sure if it should be pure free aternation, or if there's also some conditioned cases where the trill sounds like overdoing it.

I've decided not to include phonemic affricates, even though they perhaps normally would be included in languages that allow word-initial /tʃt-/.
The thing is, not only are stop-fricative clusters allowed with homogenous places of articulation, but also at heterogenous places: /dv/, /tx/, /ks/, /kʃ/, /ps/, &c.
Similarly, I've ignored palatalization and labialization; rather, I've interpreted it as a realization of clustering with j and w respectively.
These processes can occur on just about every consonant, so it's not worth exploding the consonant inventory.

I wasn't sold on lateral fricatives, but after seeing Tlingit, I figured: why not have a bunch of laterals?
I decided on having voiceless laterals as a kind of "less intense" lateral fricative.
All the same, the voiceless laterals might be in free alternation with the fricatives: l̥~ɬ, ʎ̥~ʎ̝̊ (and can I just state for the record how infuriating it is not to have a curlycued ʎ!).

The liquids, especially the devoiced ones (r̥ l̥ ʎ̥ j̊), are generally pronounced with slightly more friction than usual, but not enough to qualify them as even halfway to fricative.
The bilabial approximant w patterns oddly: it appears only to labialize other consonants (except for ejectives, nasals, and r̥/r).
It has no voicing feature of its own (it assimilates voice to whatever consonant is nearest).
Admittedly, it may be better to analyze it not as a phoneme, but instead to give a labialized version of most phonemes, but at that point we've sacrificed an approachable presentation while running ashore of phonemic vs featural theory.
I'm quite happy to say the language has 58 phonemes instead of 34+ʷ.

In the design of the liquids, I saw that many languages, even with massive consonant inventories, only have r l j w h.
In my case, I knew I wanted two rhotics because Junen Rha, Chechen, and Czech all do, and I already had four laterals.
I'm still chasing the pronounciation of Czech r, so some of that may yet enter the language: perhaps /r̝̊/?

About h, I see a lot of languages use h and friends as replacements for x and friends.
Only a few (Kabardian, Chechen, Shixing, and Arabic in my quick search) seem to have a well-developed, independent ecosystem of radical consonants --- even fewer that click languages.
Given that Ukrainian doesn't have h, I'm not a fan of debuccalization, and I'm even less attached to the glottal stop in this language, I decided against any glottals.
On the other hand, I did still want a kind of coda h sound, but I think I'm going to get that from my voiceless liquids.






What's wrong with Russian vowels?
I'll go with them, even though Ukrainian has ɪ in place of ɨ, since I want to get better at ɨ, and don't really want to reinforce the i/ɪ separation that seems to come up a lot in my conlanging thought process.

TODO:
I think whispered vowels aren't going to be a thing.
If they were going to be there, the consonant clusters would get all the more pronounced by their deletion.
Perhaps a bit of "umlaut" could be left behind by these whispered/deleted vowels which could get noticed in the inflectional morphology.

TODO:
I'm being pulled in two different directions for allophony for a.
I'd like e, æ (French-ish a), and ə, but the ways I'm thinking of getting them are ɛ~e, a~ə, and a~æ.
Really, it's that I want fronting umlaut and raising umlaut, but having both is too much.
One option I've got is fronting back vowels immediately after palatal consonants only and ignoring any harmony considerations; that could lead to front rounded sounds, which I'm not sure I really want, not without trying some words.
That still leaves the question of ɛ~e open, though.
Maybe merely ɛ > e in stressed syllables?
I still don't have schwa, but is that such a loss?, or I could get it back in unstressed open syllables at the end of prosodic words.

TODO contrastive hierarchy 




Stress is marked primarily with length.
It is fixed to the first syllable; secondary stress falls every other syllable.
TODO: Now, the thing is, if I have prefixes, should the stress move?
If it does shift, could that undo old stress-conditioned sound changes or bring back old unstress-conditioned changes?
TODO: poetry might be affected by historical syllables (deleted vowels still count towards syllable counts), or I might say the "poetical" "tradition" is novel and so uses just that current form of the language.

